# 1501-001 Lecture Notes

## [SEP-16] Lec-04: Java input, tracing code

We'll build our first "app" end-to-end today.

### introduce keyboard input in Java

- [ ] make a main and an App class
  - [x] the main's only job in life is to create the App and tell it to run()
  - [x] the App will communicate with the user and (at least for now) be in charge of input and output
- [x] goal: prompt for a name, read it in, then say "Hi" to that user
  - [x] `import java.util.Scanner;`
  - [x] `Scanner keyboard = new Scanner(System.in);`
    - [x] Scanner, like String is something you can "talk" to with methods (like "foo".length()). We say Scanner and String are `reference types`.
    - [x] compare to int and double, which are kinda "dumb". We call them `primitive types`.
  - [x] prompt (suggest using print, not println)
  - [x] `String name = keyboard.next();`
    - [x] what if there are spaces in the name?
    - [x] nextLine()

### the challenge: MRU username creation

- [x] introduce problem
  - [x] **task**: write down some examples
- [x] **[3 minute timer] task**: create a natural language algorithms (groups of 3)
  - [ ] **task** test by walking through examples
- [ ] **task**: convert to pseudocode
  - [x] introduce indexOfFirst, indexOfLast
  - [ ] **task**: test by doing a trace with some of our examples
- [ ] **task**: convert to Java
  - [x] introduce indexOf, lastIndexOf
    - [x] if you want to use these instead of indexOfFirst/Last in pseudocode, that's cool
  - [ ] **task**: test by running some of our examples; we'll need to create a simple App class to do this

---

## Lecture Lookback

Got through most of the material; got sidetracked (in a good way!) by some good questions. Also used some time at the start of the class to talk about the current completion rate for week-01 drills, but that was necessary

### Review

- [ ] what do we need to do to get keyboard input in Java?
- [ ] how does next() treat white space characters? How about nextLine()?
- [ ] you want to get a person's full name from the keyboard; which Scanner method should you use?
- [ ] why is using a println() for a prompt not ideal? What should you use instead?

### Terms

- [ ] Scanner
- [ ] System.in
- [ ] import
- [ ] next()
- [ ] nextLine()
- [ ] nextInt()
- [ ] nextDouble()
- [ ] primitive type
- [ ] reference type
- [ ] newline character
- [ ] white space character
- [ ] prompt

## Looking Ahead

Need to move the following to tomorrow's lab:

- [ ] tracing
- [ ] integer div / mod
- [ ] nextInt/nextDouble => nextLine gotcha
